Hello everyone.
Welcome back to exploring quantum physics.
I'm Charles Clark.
And we're now going to look at
the angular momentum operator
in its role as an effective potential.
This is going to proceed from applying
some of the commutator identities
that you derived in the previous part.
So again, what we're doing
here involves a fundamental derivation and
I just have to emphasis, if you really
want to benefit from this course
and learn something practical,
both about quantum physics and
with a lot of applications
to other types of analysis.
You have to work it out.
I mean, I can't force you to.
But it's time to decide whether
it's worth your while or not.
I'll have to say that I think
that when you complete this
derivation you will have done
something foundational and
you should see that it
has implications for
a lot of other physics problems that you
may have been working with in your career.
Electromagnetism, acoustics,
wave motion and the like.
I'm just going to keep before
you the various identities
of fundamental things
which we started with and
things that we proved together,
or you proved offline.
Just try to keep these visible and
in mind so
that you can get the results
from them that we need.
The most important thing that we're
going to do in this part is to show
the relationship of the angular
momentum operators, the L squared,
to the kinetic energy operator.
Now you might anticipate that
there is such a thing because after
all L squared looks like this and
this is r cross p so there's a p
squared lurking in there somewhere.
Just how does that work out?
Well, once again we have.
Here's the first.
Well here are the two components of the.
Of the scale or product.
And I have taken the minus sign of
the h bar squared outside just so
that were dealing with something that
just has the x's and the p's in.
Okay, and dq is.
The expression for just in case that.
So unfamiliar to you.
Just helps simplify the notation.
Okay so
now we can pass through the levy chevita.
And we're now back, then now we have
the contraction identity because
we're summing over these common indices
i that came from the scalar product and
now we apply the contraction
identities to.
To these here.
So in other words, this is just a straight
forward compression math symbol.
And then we're going to reduce this
further by using this identity
to move the x out from behind
out from in front of the derivative.
Okay.
So, yeah,
there's very little point in trying
to follow a fast paced derivation there.
But starting from this, you should
be able to derive this identity.
Which shows that the angular
momentum is linked up
to the kinetic energy in
a rather profound way.
So, just to express that
in a more familiar form,
let's take the Hamiltonian for the motion
of a particle in a fixed potential.
And now we see the kinetic energy
can be written in this form where
R in our notation is like xa xxa.
X a square root of x a.
The usual radius.
So, we get, we didn't actually
transform to spherical coordinates, but
there's a very natural development of the
expression of the square of the kinetic
energy the square of the angle momentum
operator brings us to this form where
the kinetic energy is now expressed
naturally in spherical polar
coordinates with L being an operator
of the max of those coordinates.
So that's how angular momentum
enters the Hamiltonian.
Thus if you think about
where this came from,
any time you have an equation with a
LaPlacian, you have something that's very
much like an angular momentum though
it may not be described in those terms.
So the various multiple
moments with electromagnetic
field correspond to angular momentum,
the same things,
acoustics and fluid mechanics,
and a lot of the analytical
techniques that we'll develop for
understanding.
L squared,
have applications in those areas as well.
The other very important point about this,
I said angular is more
powerful than gravity.
Well, gravity's pretty powerful but,
this basically we get
a V effective which is proportional
to the L square over r squared.
So, this is one of these,
this is this inverse, this is
a part of the kinetic energy operator and
in the variational methods
section we saw that short distances
correspond to high kinetic energy.
So basically the angular momentum presents
a sort of an effective potential for to
particle motion that is
repulsive inverse square law.
And I'll just note that there's
a further generalization of this type of
approach can be made to
an n dimensional system.
And we're not going to do that here, but
it is something that is used in
practice for nuclear physics,
molecular collisions, and
sometimes atomic physics.
It is sometimes advantages
to have a fully symmetrized
system of coordinates
includes all particles.
And then one gets some implications
about short range behavior of
those systems from looking at the,
thinking of the Generalized angular
momentum has an effective potential.
Okay, so now we're going to conclude
this lecture with the description of
the relationship between the angular
momentum and the lens vector that was
discussed in the earlier
lectures on the hydrogen atom.
Hope to see you then.